Thank you so much.
Thank you for the wait. No problem. Yeah. Um, thank you.
So, um, it's a joint hearing with, uh, DIA
and Public Service Commission.
So if you would like to start with some opening remarks,
you want to do it, um,
in your individual organization capacity
or together, that's totally fine.
Thank you. And then we'll go onto questions. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, um, Madam Chair
and committee, and, uh, I'll be brief.
My name's Paul James. I'm the Government Chief Digital
Officer and the Chief
Executive of Department of Internal Affairs.
Um, and it's a pleasure to be here.
I'm joined by Murray Davy, um,
who is the Chief Digital Officer for Department
of Internal Affairs, and my colleague
from the Public Services Commission.
But you introduce yourself, Hugo.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. My name's Hugo Batal.
I'm the Deputy Chief Executive Strategy, policy
and Integrity at the commission.
Thank you. And so in terms
of just some brief introductory remarks, um, so
as Government Chief Digital Officer are mandated
by the Public Services Commission under Public Services
Legislation, uh, as a system lead,
and that means that I have responsibility
to work across the public service, not just down
inside my own agency, um, across digital.
So practically what that looks like is we have a focus on
helping ensure there's a consistent vision
and direction for digital across the public sector.
Uh, we work around standards, policies
and guidance to help consistency
and coherence across the public sector.
And we also put in place tools
and support services to support the public sector.
We don't take away from individual agency
or see accountability, uh, to deliver the services
and take responsibility for their own digital, uh, service
and systems and applications.
But we look to provide value in a collective.
And so, uh, for example, uh, we have a, uh, collection
of services, things like, uh, a cloud framework agreement
with a major company.
So public service agencies come in, uh,
through our commercial constructs to access those services.
It means that we scale up the purchasing power of the crown
through those contracts
and get, um, benefits around pricing,
but we can also put in, um, standards around security
and other things that are important like that.
So that's a system lead role.
And in terms of ai, I've also been asked to lead, um, uh,
the adoption of AI for the public service.
And so take a similar approach to what we do around digital,
but with ai, which there's clearly close connections.
And so, um, my focus is on the adoption
of AI by the public service.
So, uh, the customer base for us is the public service.
So that's who we focus on as agencies.
Of course, we think deeply about New Zealanders
because that's the public services customers.
Um, but our starting point is the agencies that we work
with, and it focuses around the adoption of ai.
I didn't wanna say a lot more than that.
I thought that, uh, it would be best to be guided
by the committee in
terms of the questions that you might have.
Great. Thank you. Anything that you would like
to add? Um, hug,
Uh, no, uh, the only two other elements other than, uh,
the designation of, um,
the government Chief Digital Officer under the Public
Service Act, uh, the commission, uh, is also, uh,
obviously the, um, employer on behalf of the Crown
of Chief Executives also has a responsibility
for developing capability of its, of its leaders.
And we do that through the Leadership development Center,
which is club funded by, uh, all agencies.
Uh, and then, um, you know, we, uh,
also have responsibilities around performance
and accountability and, um,
and for, uh, integrity and ethics.
So promoting, uh, account, uh, promoting integrity, uh,
transparency and accountability, that's,
that's our main areas for,
that are relevant for the committee today.
That's great. Thank you, Dr. Hamish.
Yeah. Excellent. Um, thank you.
I appreciate talking about the adoption of AI
and public service.
How much of it is actually being driven down,
uh, from, from top?
And how much is actually people
actually developing these tools
and using the tools, whether it be, um, bundled
with other, other software?
That's a great question. I think it's
really important that we have both.
Uh, why it's really important we have both is that, uh,
like any tool, um, AI needs to be applied
to what's the objective here?
What's the business purpose, what's the benefit?
What are we trying to achieve?
And that will, uh, most often come from up, if you like,
from down from people who are working,
have accountabilities, responsibilities.
Uh, but what we also know when there's new technology coming
in and the public service needs to respond
and adapt, rather than everyone learning a hundred percent
by themselves, totally a new
and a fresh, how can we actually accelerate
or support by bringing in consistent standards, templates,
policies, guidance, uh, to create both a platform
and a head start for people.
Um, over time, I'd expect us to mature a little bit too.
And by that I mean we'll start putting in place common
tools, some common technology solutions for people to use,
but at the moment, we're not at that point.
Mm-hmm. So, yeah.
Do, do you have any other technologies which this
approach has been used to, um, for its adoption and the
Public service?
Yeah, I mean, this is how we work generally
across, across digital.
So we try and we put in place frameworks, expectations,
common approaches,
but agencies know
their responsibilities better than anyone else.
They've got their own accountabilities.
Um, you know, I'm not gonna be
responsible for social services.
That's gonna be the responsibility
of the Ministry of Social Development.
Um, and technology needs to be deployed in context
and around a particular, uh, need and purpose
and to improve a New Zealanders experience or outcomes.
And so it's getting the balance between
how do you have something that is coherent across the public
service, but is actually responsive to the immediate needs
and responsibilities of that agency
and the new Zealanders that they support
Who've been doing. Thank you. Um,
I'm curious
to know whether you've got a sense of which agencies
of organizations are the highest users
and which are much lower users.
We have a sense, um, and we have a sense
because, uh, I hope the committee will be familiar
with an annual survey that we've started
around AI adoption across the, uh,
broadly the 46 core agencies that are our mandate.
Um, and so we get some, uh, data from that.
We also have a community of practice operating.
Uh, we've just got several hundred people, uh, come online
around that once a month or so.
And so in that conversation, we get a sense as well.
So it is, as we see across other technologies mixed in terms
of where agencies are up to.
Um, A, CC
and IR are quite, um, um, proactive
and they're quite engaged in ai, uh, themselves.
And there are other organizations.
It tends to reflect their digital maturity as well.
Either their data isn't structural set up
or they're not cloud hosting,
and it's harder to start to deploy the technologies.
So they are earlier in terms of what they might be doing.
So we see variety at the moment, but I'd identify a, C, C
and IR as two organizations that are more advanced in their,
um, exploration of the value or utility of
Ai. Yeah, sure. And
at the opposite end of the spectrum,
the lower uptake or the, the least use,
Um, always a bit wary about pointing out agencies
that might not be, uh, there.
But, um, for some organizations, um, perhaps, uh,
technology is a bigger part of their, uh, business.
Maybe some of the population agencies, agencies
that might represent, um, views into the public sector.
They might not be, uh, technology
to deliver services isn't as much of what they do.
So they're not necessarily, uh, into AI as much.
But having said that, they are talking
to us often about the policy or standards or design.
So we've had quite an engagement with, for example,
around ai.
Uh, 'cause they see both concerns of bias, um,
but more they see opportunities
for actually improve their outcomes.
If this technology is adopted in effective ways
that make it easier for the communities that they represent,
Is there any resistance?
So using, using, using resistance in any areas.
Um, what we see is, um, a broad kind of, um,
if you like coder around that is we see, uh, sufficiency.
So people are, no, we are, okay.
We, we don't think we need ai. We're all right.
They might not say that, but we see
that in, in the patterns.
Uh, we see, uh, concern, we're not sure about this, we,
but worried about this.
We see confusion, which,
which tool we use, where, where do we go?
So I think those are all natural responses when you have a
new technology, which is still moving quite fast
and probably a bit immature.
Um, and so our real focus is, um, a big part
of our focus is actually this foundational, um, policies,
guidance, and education for leaders so that they can start
to build their own knowledge and comfort so they can see.
So I think we've got a duty to the public to make sure
that we are aware of what this technology is
and thinking about how it could
improve delivery of services.
So we are really encouraging people.
I, I've stood in front of CES and Deputy Cs
and said, in five years time, it's hard
to imagine you wouldn't look back
and see that you've used AI more
now than you did five years ago.
Mm-hmm. So if that's the case,
what do you need to start doing today?
Prepare for that. And often it's just about your own
education and your own ability to, um, operate
and then start to see what might be possible
for the services that you're accountable for.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. Right. Um, I'll ask a quick question.
We were discussing about hallucinations, um, in AI
and in your role of building capability in
our public system.
So this morning, MBI told us that, see there needs
to be a human in the loop.
So just making sure that the information is correct.
How is that being put in place, that kind of, uh,
system kind of control, um, in, in public services?
Uh, just curious to know that.
Yes, absolutely.
Look, I think, um, what we see is that, that
that's definitely the case that you can see bias
and hallucinations in these systems.
And we will all read a media of examples
and instances of that, the actual
deployment of AI into the public sector.
The one is very limited. So, um, it,
it's into administrative tasks
around summarizing information
or it's, uh, some, um, administrative efficiencies.
And so, uh, we don't see, um,
the modern AI tools being deployed into core
delivery operations or responsibilities
where those hallucinations
or biases would present real risks and challenges.
So we don't see that yet.
However, um, the framework that we've, um, adopted
and have put out across the public service
around adoption is based on six OECD principles.
And it's all very much aimed at trying to make sure that,
uh, there's careful, responsible, ethical
and assured adoption of ai.
So I think a lot of the risks can be seen if, um, you go
through very deliberate processes around it
and are very, uh, prudent about how you do it.
So, um, Murray, here's objective also for DIA,
he'll be horrified if we just deployed AI straight into our
system without thinking about it.
So it is creating the right technical environment,
so sandboxes, places that are safe to start to experiment
and see what happens, uh,
and then making sure we've got all the right
governance and controls across it.
So I, I think we should, uh, be mindful of the risks,
but at the moment, we are very early in the deployment,
and so we're not seeing those emerge. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. I might add, uh, there's also controls
that you can apply.
So, uh, approaches like retrieval, augmenta,
augmented generation, uh, approaches such as retrieval,
augmented generation, or rag as it's called that enable you
to point a, a particular AI at a particular knowledge base
and say you can only provide answers
based on that knowledge base.
So that helps you to make sure
that you're using factual information
and you can be more confident about the output
that you're gonna get from that.
So, um, so
That's More like a customized kind
Of Yes, absolutely.
And so, you know, if we are using an AI internally within
the organization, uh, then we'll do that.
We'll, if we're using it for HR processes, for example, uh,
we'll point it at a set of HR policies
and processes, say that's the only knowledge base from
which you can provide the answers.
And that way we can be confident that the answers
that it's providing are accurate, um,
and similar approaches can be used for in other use cases.
That's good. Uh, any question from Dr. David Wilson?
Yeah, thank you. Um, it's really
in instructive for us this morning.
We, we can, well, at least I came to the conclusion
that perhaps this was disaggregated
and sporadic across the whole public service.
And, um, so now you've told me
that it's a system wide approach.
I'm very pleased to hear that. Um, it's very good.
You said that you were looking at adoption capability,
performance, accountability, and ethics.
Also very pleased to hear you, um, done that.
'cause when we've bashed into this area,
that's what keeps coming up.
Um, and so for us as policy makers,
we'll be looking at areas
that will bump into ethics all the time.
And so my question really is how can we learn from
what you are learning is, I know it's constrained by
what you can do within the public service,
but, you know, how can we pick up on what's happening here?
I think, um, what we recognize is everyone's
learning in this area at the moment.
Um, and it's not just public
sector, it's private sector too.
Mm-hmm. So, oh, yes. Uh, I think it, it's really encouraging
Very fast and pushing against
boundaries way faster than we
Areye. Yes, they are.
And um, so I was in, uh,
Singapore in September this year.
I go there every year for a digital government exchange
with about 12 countries and talking
with the countries there about ai,
but also had a round table with some large Singapore
and businesses around what they're doing around ai.
Uh, and they were clear that, um,
they're not getting a return on investment at the moment
with ai that most of their, uh, proof
of concept aren't working.
Um, but they're still highly committed to ai. Yeah.
So they, they see the promise,
but what that told me is
that the private sector is not cracked at yet either.
That they're still on, on that journey.
I think in terms of your point about how we share learnings,
so that's why we are really focused on, uh,
executive education, but also I
mentioned that community of practice.
So bringing people together who are doing this
to swap notes, to share insights, uh, I think
that's the power of the public services actually, to be able
to bring, uh, people from quite
different organizations together.
Uh, and to learn from each other.
Um, we have to learn from outside the public service too.
Yeah. So, um, we've got a, um, an advisory body
that we've set up just to, for us to able to talk through,
um, uh, which is New Zealand people,
but from, um, private sector
and some public sector expertise.
So we need to find ways
that we can bring those different views and perspectives in,
and that will pick up ethics, uh, um, as well.
So as, um, policy policymakers, legislation, can we come
to a place and ask what are the ethical dimensions
around this policy, this evangelous new idea?
Well, um, we are always happy in, uh,
in the right channels to be able to provide our views.
And I think in, in digital government, it's a, it's an area
of responsibility where there is a high level of openness
and bipartisanship is my experience.
And so, um, minister Collins, who we worked
to is always very supportive of us engaging with people.
So, do you think, um, so any, any closeups, any members?
So just, um, uh, thinking about IP with the use of ai,
the issues of plagiarism
and all, so we like kind of covering ourselves
for, for these kind of issues.
It's a really good question.
And again, I, um, think it's an area
where the answer isn't clear yet.
And so that most often comes through, um, LMS
and the training data sets that they're being built on.
And so, uh, how are they getting access to that data?
And you can see, again, stories
of people feeling like the content they've produced has been
consumed by these, uh, tools
and that they're training and learning off them.
We, we are not building our own LLM, uh,
from New Zealand Public Service.
We don't have the capital or the expertise to do that.
I think as we see things develop over the next couples
of the technology, we will start to see potential for us
to either tailor, um, something
or potentially, uh, even look at
how we might invest in a small language model.
There'll be opportunities, I think, for us to do something
that has got the New Zealand context
and, um, that will help with those points.
But for that wider question around plagiarism,
we see the risks, uh,
and the training data sets that things are built on
at the moment, we are really subject to that market.
Um, so it's not something we're looking closely at.
If there's anything to that,
Um, I asked, oh, you go first. Yes.
Thank you. Um, just looking specifically at the strategy,
and I know there's been a lot of, um, commentary
post the release of the strategy.
There's an acknowledgement up top that it was, um,
that AI was used to help generate it.
And there are a couple of, um, uh,
team observations made, one around, um,
potential hallucinations within it, um,
and another around, um, basic spelling error with it.
Did, uh, any, any comment on that?
Um, that's a, a strategy
that we were involved in creating.
So we worked alongside mb it's obviously oriented at the
whole of country whole of economy.
Um, we haven't really put a strategy
in place for the public sector.
We, we made the decision that
actually what's really needed is guidance is, um,
principles, um, for the public sector
because it's moving so quickly.
So, um, so it's hard for me to comment on the, um, uh,
questions around hallucinations or, or spelling mistakes
and something that while we were involved in it ultimately
was an MB lead across that.
So my apologies. But
You, do you think there's scope or a need
or a similar strategy for you to have a similar strategy
but without hallucinations or scope?
Um, we, we have talked about that.
So we have a strategy for digital public service, uh,
which is our anchor strategy.
It's been in place since 2019.
It's largely vision and principles based.
So we still think it works.
We had a lock at and went, it's still not, not too bad.
But what we really heard from the public sector was
crying out for guidance.
Um, so that people wanted guidance about how
to think about ai, how to approach it,
what are the principles or parameters.
And potentially we could wrap all this up in a
strategy at some point in the future.
But at the moment, that's really what, um, we're being asked
for by the public service.
Interesting. Talking with other jurisdictions and,
and, uh, countries about their strategies
and in some cases their legislation.
The feedback I've been getting, uh,
from other countries is they're actually moving away a
little bit from strategies or legislation.
'cause the technology's moving so fast,
it's very hard to keep up with.
And they're thinking that actually a principal's based
approach that can then respond to
whatever changes in the future is potentially
where they need to head from now.
So, um, as I said, really guidance frameworks policy is
where our focus is for the next 12 to 18 months.
Mm-hmm. So I'll ask this next question.
So, because AI can, uh, I mean access any, uh,
any websites, so with our information going on websites,
uh, how are we looking at ensuring
that it's not accessible by any of the AI tools
that we don't want it to be?
So is it like, work on some kind of firewall?
So because it could be information that is just relevant
to New Zealand and maybe there is some information
that might be sensitive.
Obviously sensitive information won't go our website,
but just, you know, if it is stored in a way
where AI can access, so how, I mean the it, there,
there is this assurance that it'll not go out
through any AI tool.
That's a great question.
So, um, in our starting point guidance
for people is if you publish something on a website,
you need to expect that it is public
and anyone will be able to see it and access it.
And that includes AI tools.
So, but there is a risk, those tools might take
that material and might either hallucinate it
or introduce other bias or connect it up
with other information so we can see that risk.
We think in an AI future, it's gonna be really important
for you to be trusted, known,
and authoritative sources of information.
And so one of our, um, current, uh, areas
of focus is a chat bot for the.gov got NZ web domain.
So that would run across all websites that we're dot gov nz.
So, uh, we've completed proof of concept of that,
uh, went pretty well.
So we've just gone out to market.
We've had three vendors come in
and we're just at the final stages of making a choice.
So we intend to put in place a chat bot
that runs across the.gov nz domain,
and then if we can say that's a New Zealand government
product and, um, avoid hallucinations
and some of the other challenges we can see, uh,
we'll respond quickly if we have any issues,
but give people a place they can go that's branded,
certified, and trusted as opposed to, I mean,
Google was a real key entry point into New Zealand services
digitally for, for a long time and still is.
So people jump into their search engine
and Google search engine into
how do I do this with the New Zealand government?
And that takes to a particular place on the digital
footprint of government.
So you can see that AI tools will
start to do the same thing.
I I don't think we can avoid that,
but it's how do we create visibility for the public
of the trusted channels into this?
Yeah, yeah. Which is government owned and constructed.
So it can be reproduced, but it's just that
besides the source, yes,
obviously website anybody can access,
but I'm just thinking about when it is reproduced
And, and I think this is where we see the risks around,
uh, DeepFakes and what AI technology offers
and that how do you, uh, water market
or give people confidence about the providence
and the source of that information.
And so trust, which is central to digital
and government, how do we, uh, ensure
that's maintained with ai?
And there, there must be something about the brand
and so people knowing where it comes from that it is, uh,
authoritatively from the New Zealand government
and that they can have trust for these reasons,
because it's been built, uh, with respect
to the framework we've got, which has got ethics
and responsibility and transparency of its heart, et cetera.
Mm-hmm. And do we use a lot
of intranet, intranet?
Um, have you had an answer to that?
Um, uh, at the moment, those are some
of the areas we're starting to experiment
with internally is, is looking at, uh,
with agencies though most agencies will have their own
intranet internally with their own internal information.
So how do you make it easier for your own staff to get
that information and access that information?
So a couple of areas that we are looking at, um,
we're looking at can we, uh, use AI
to surface information very quickly out of a knowledge base
for our staff to help to respond to customer queries, uh,
and also for our own staff.
So that HR example that I used
before, rather than having to go to one of our HR people
and ask them a question, can you actually ask a a chat bot,
which can lock up our processes
and guide our staff, which saves everybody internally time.
So those are some of the areas we're starting to pilot now
That I'm asking
because that, uh, in my view will help, uh,
confine the information to the organization
And absolutely in, in both those cases,
we're confining information to known
and good sources, um, so that we know that, you know,
the answers our staff will be getting back are, are solid.
Yeah. New question Lu Davidson.
It's really a SAP off some of the answers to your,
your questions Yeah.
Around the trust issue. Yes.
And you've talked about some of the
potential steps that could be taken.
Why do you think we rank so low in trust currently?
Like New Zealand's near bottom
and Global trust and ai?
Um, look, I'll make an observation about, uh,
digital services, but Hugo,
you might like to contribute on that too.
So, um, Kiwi's count the survey
that Public Service Commission has,
which runs I think quarterly, um, across a range of services
really we, we've got some questions in the last 18 months
around digital, uh, the latest survey that came out, 86%
of people who access services digitally
of the New Zealand public Service have trust in them
that's higher than accessing services
in physical channels or omnichannels.
So people who access services digitally have greater trust
in them than people who access services in other ways.
Now, that's potentially
because they've made a choice if they
wanna access it digitally.
So I understand that,
but I do, that gives us confidence
that when they access the digital services have got a high
level of trust in that digital service,
which I think is of real value.
I know that there's been, um, static
or declining levels of trust in, in government
and public services across time.
I think we actually held pretty well through COVID.
Uh, yes. So, um, actually trust in the public service, uh,
through COVID actually increased to the highest level ever.
So it's 69%, it's come back a little bit.
It's at, uh, I think around 60 61%,
which is higher than when the series started.
And about, uh, five
to 10 percentage points higher than the private sector.
I think your question is about sort of concerns about ai.
Um, prior to answering that though, um,
the New Zealand public service actually consistently ranks,
uh, in the top five, uh, in the world, uh, on, on most
of the main measures for integrity and lack of corruption.
And that's a position we want to maintain.
But I think your, what you were, um,
talking about the surveys showing, uh, concerns
amongst the New Zealand public
and even within the public service about the use of AI
and the sort of unknown and the ethics of that.
And I think there's a genuine as issue, uh,
as the public service adopts ai.
Um, and that's why it's being done in a very careful,
responsible way, starting
with adopting the best practice frameworks, uh,
that have been issued, uh,
and why we're taking quite a sort
of balanced approach towards seeing the
opportunities as well as the risks.
One area also internationally to your earlier question, uh,
what we're seeing internationally is an investment in
leadership and capability and training.
And that's been a consistent message.
And we've been working with the GCDO, uh, the LDC,
the Leadership Development Center has, uh,
developed two courses.
So there's a masterclass for chief executives
and there's also a foundational learning program, uh,
which is about four to five modules on AI
that goes through ethics.
Actually it's available, uh, if you Google, uh, Google,
sorry, Uh, LDC foundational courses.
Um, I'm doing that course myself. Um, it's really helpful.
It's really easy to understand.
It goes through sort of ethics, the productivity, sort
of the possibilities, the risks.
Uh, it also talks about things
that are quite specific to our context.
So treaty wa, all those things are kind of covered
and, um, that's been tested with a, a first cohort
of senior leaders and we're working with GCDO
to think about the forward program for that.
But we think investment
and leadership is going to be really important
to make sure we sort of, we are, uh, dig, uh,
savvy in this area, so we understand it.
I probably, um, didn't do
your question justice either then.
So, um, one of the conundrums
that exist in digital government across Westminster style
democracy, so we work pretty readily
with other jurisdictions, is, um,
around privacy and information.
For example, people very nervous about government holding
all the information about them
or sharing information about them.
Very frustrated that we keep asking them
for the same information all the time.
And, uh, both are true
and it's a potentially a little bit like that with AI is
that there's real concerns in trust about government
and AI generally, but then real frustrations about the
services and adopting or adapting to AI
to provide a better quality of service.
And what we have learned is if we do a really good job
with the service, we build trust from that.
And so again, that just
emphasizes Hu's point about the choice we've made,
about starting with, um, adopting.
We have to move, we have to adopt it,
but we want to be careful and deliberate
and do it in ways that, um, works for people.
Then we think that we'll build trust. Yeah.
Great. So some subs off.
Okay, there's a number there now, um, on the trust piece,
and you talked about 86% trust in the digital
interactions or transactions.
I'm curious to know whether, as you also pointed out that
that's from people carrying those out.
Have you seen a shift with the uptake
of AI across the public service?
Have, have you seen a shift in people wanting
to move away from transacting digitally as a result?
No. No. So we, these questions only went in last year.
Um, so we, I, we wouldn't have a long series of data,
but there's continuing increase in
digital uptake of services.
But I would also make the point, we haven't really got AI
as the service entry point yet for services.
So people aren't, um, using an assistant, an AI assistant
to help them access or navigate services.
I think we're probably sort of few years away from that,
um, being widespread.
So, so we haven't seen that yet,
but there's probably not really an
opportunity for people either. Yeah.
Right. Okay. And to come to the masterclass and the,
and the training side of things, um, are you able
to give us an idea of the numbers of people who've played
that to date, but also what that, what that looks like?
Um, they, what you'd expect to have through
that in the next six months, 12 months?
Um, it was the initial pilot I believe.
Um, I'll, I'll have to, um, confirm the numbers.
I think, uh, there were, um,
I think 14 chief executives in the first masterclass.
So it was just a testing, uh, testing the concept
and they were around, uh, sorry, uh,
I will make sure I get you correct numbers.
I think it was around 45 senior leaders who attended the,
uh, first pilot sort of, uh, uh, who've been going
through the first sort of foundational learning.
Um, and, uh, we're still working on sort of what, you know,
the, the forward work program to 2027.
So we started with CEEs, not bad, uh,
and we went to deputy chief
executives ran two master classes.
Deputy chief executives got about 30 in each of those,
sorry, we had 50 people went through the, uh, the um,
LDC program that was really to test and develop.
And now we've put it online so
that you don't have to go in as part of a cohort.
It's just there for people to use now that we've proved it.
So, but we, we also held a, an event in parliament,
which was really by the public sector for the public sector.
We had about 300 leaders from across the public service
there for a day, uh, talking about ai.
But we are looking
to make sure everybody engages in some shape
or form with this training over time.
I dunno. Thank you.
Um, this has been really helpful and interesting.
Um, I'm interested in the impact, um,
in the public service on, uh, like for service users
and people who work within the public service floor,
particularly for young people.
Um, it's something that's not in the GCDs, um,
briefs, cabinet papers.
It's not, um, something that this part of the, uh,
MDs document that NDDR strategy,
but presumably we are working on this
through a point at which there are thousands
of parts jobs gone.
Um, the job marketers, the young people, 15,000
with the election out worked, um,
and then moving into a job market, which is very,
very changed that they, you know, you don't have, um,
the lower level analytical jobs, the running jobs.
Um, what, who is the system steward to ensure
that young New Zealanders have access to the skills
that they'll need to drive the AI developments?
Um, that is an OECD principle around data use that, um,
people come along for the journey
and that, um, we are not robots, we're decoded of the robots
who is in charge to make sure that, um,
young New Zealanders have access to what they need to do
to get the skills they need to, to be able
to use these tools in a professional setting.
Yeah, that's, um, again, a very good question
and it's a conversation topic
with other jurisdictions when we talk with them too.
So at the moment we are not seeing any employment
displacement from, from ai.
Um, it's, uh, at the moment an assist tool.
Um, it might be taking steps out for people, meaning
that they can do things in a shorter amount of time.
Um, but it's been, I guess, well traversed in, um,
worldwide really about what the impacts of this might be.
And there's just lots of questions about that.
Um, we don't have, uh, really good sites at the moment about
what that might mean or be.
Um, we do think that, uh,
employee engagement is really important around AI
and AI adoption and then the worker voice,
if you like, uh, through that as well.
So we've been engaged with the PSA, uh,
we consulted them on the draft of our, our framework, um,
and, uh, we'll continue to engage with them around that.
Um, what we're finding inside DIA, for example,
we've got our own community practice, which is just DIA
and we've got people turning up
who in their part-time are doing a PhD in ai.
And then people who turn up who are very Zealand
know more about it than we do.
And then people are very frustrated of their inability
to access AI tools inside the department
as we are cautiously moving.
And then people are just, what, what is this?
And, and, and
so we are seeing real diversity in people's views
and appetite and desire.
So again, I just come back to, I think, um, the direction
of travel is clear, but the speed and pace
and implications of it are not,
and it is quite immature the market.
So we are very confident that we need
to do something we need, but our focus really is building
capability and building the foundations so
that we can respond to
what might eventuate when we're not clear yet, just
Yep. So, um,
it's, I just wanna tease out, um,
what you said about no job this place.
May I, it's not, I, I guess what,
what most people would assume.
So how do we test that? How do we know that?
How do we as a committee, when we see review, sort of
make sure then that, um, what's happening
inside the departments is that there are efficiencies
to be gained, but they're not at the expense of those docs,
which, um, we, we think
That, I think it's a, um, I, I recognize it as a,
it's actually a complex topic
and a potentially difficult topic.
So we haven't seen any employment displacement yet,
but it could well be the case.
And for the, uh, as a public service ce,
we are always balancing, um, the need
to deliver the best possible service to New Zealanders for
that to be, uh, as affordable as possible for New Zealanders
alongside maintaining a workforce who is capable
and confident in delivering.
And it's a reinforcing cycle.
I can see that technology, it does have an impact, uh,
in terms of employment.
And so, um, for example, uh, we deliver service
around passports is now primarily online.
That's how people access it.
So we don't have the same front counter, uh, staff.
Um, but there's other parts of the department have grown
and changed and we've got more jobs in
other parts of the department.
I don't know what AI is going to do for the, uh, shape
of the workforce, um, across the public sector,
but it is reasonable to expect
that it will shift it and move it.
And there may be, uh, workplace
or workforce impacts from ai.
We're not seeing that yet,
and it's still quite new and early.
Just one more, just, just finishing off this, all
that is helpful, um, coming.
My first question was really about, um, how do,
where is the system stewardship around making sure that
those, you know, we want New Zealanders
to have the skills in the public sector to use AI wealth.
Um, how do we make sure that that's not, um,
just some people, some people who are the adopters,
the PhDs, they're the people
going out and getting these skills.
How do we make sure that's equitable, that's fair,
that's getting through the one stool.
How do we make sure that that's happening if we
don't have someone with the hand?
I think, um, we, we face a question like this
or similar often for GCDO
and uh, this, um, uh, it's important to recognize
that chief executives are accountable
for their own organizations
and their own responsibilities, including their workforce.
And so it's important that we support that.
We provide, uh, um, policies, guidance tools
that run across the public sector,
but we're still very much organized
around public sector accountabilities falling
within executives.
So that question will be answered in different ways
in different organizations.
Um, my focus is digital
and ai, we care about capability in order to be able
to do that successfully and well.
I think the stewardship of the overall public sector
workforce is probably a bit more
with the Public Services Commission.
Um, and I think to your question though, in terms
of people coming through, that's probably also part of the,
a question for the curriculum
and sort of the education sector.
So the sort of, you know, the ministry there.
Um, and I know that there are initiatives there, it's just,
I'm not, you know, it's not really for me to discuss,
but it might be something you want to talk about
because that's part of the investment, uh, for the future.
Um, and so, you know, people leaving schools
with skills coming into the,
before the public service, we then have to, uh, ensure
that they understand, you know,
the core public service values, which are quite fundamental
and different from any other type of role, as well as how
that applies in terms of the AR context and,
and those sorts of things.
So, but to answer your question, I think
that's a curriculum, uh, question
and education question that that probably is something
that could be explored with the ministry.
Alright. Looks like, um, yep.
Uh, those were the questions that members
and thank you so much for answering these
questions and thank you for your time.
Thank you. Appreciate the opportunity.
We very quickly move.